Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
airway resistance and the distribution of ventilation.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Define airway resistance and describe what determines it.
Airway resistance is the impedance to airflow offered by the airways, defined,
by analogy with Ohm's law, as the driving pressure difference between the mouth and
the alveoli divided by the resulting flow rate.
It is governed by the physics of flow through tubes.
For the laminar flow that predominates in the smaller airways,
the Hagen-Poiseuille relationship applies,
and the dominant factor is the radius of the airway:
resistance is inversely proportional to the fourth power of the radius,
so that halving the radius increases resistance sixteen-fold — making airway
calibre the overwhelming determinant.
The length of the airways and the viscosity of the gas also contribute.
Surprisingly, although the individual small airways are very narrow,
the chief site of airway resistance is the medium-sized bronchi,
not the smallest airways, because the smallest airways are so numerous and their
total cross-sectional area so vast that their combined resistance is low.
So airway resistance is the pressure difference driving flow divided by the flow,
governed for laminar flow by the Hagen-Poiseuille relationship,
depending chiefly and steeply on airway radius — inversely as its fourth power —
with the main site being the medium bronchi rather than the very numerous small
airways; calibre being the key determinant,
and its reduction the basis of obstructive disease.
What factors alter airway calibre and resistance?
Since resistance depends so steeply on calibre,
the factors that alter airway calibre are the principal determinants of changes in
resistance, and they are several.
Lung volume has a marked effect: the airways are held open by the surrounding lung
tissue, the radial traction of which increases as the lung expands,
so resistance falls as lung volume rises and rises steeply at low lung volumes,
where airways narrow and may close — important at low functional residual capacity.
Bronchial smooth muscle tone alters calibre:
parasympathetic activity and various mediators cause bronchoconstriction,
narrowing the airways and raising resistance, as in asthma; sympathetic activity,
via beta-two receptors, and the beta-agonist drugs cause bronchodilatation.
The airways may be narrowed by secretions, oedema or inflammation,
as in bronchitis. The density and viscosity of the gas affect resistance where flow
is turbulent.
So airway calibre and resistance are altered by lung volume — resistance falling as
the lung expands, the airways held open by radial traction;
by bronchial smooth muscle tone — constriction raising and dilatation lowering
resistance; and by secretions, oedema and inflammation;
these factors underlying the obstructive diseases and their treatment by
bronchodilators and by maintaining lung volume.
Describe dynamic airway compression and effort-independent expiratory flow.
Dynamic airway compression is the phenomenon that, during a forced expiration,
the airways may be compressed and the flow limited,
so that beyond a certain point the expiratory flow cannot be increased by greater
effort — it becomes effort-independent.
The mechanism lies in the pressures across the airway wall.
During a forced expiration, the pleural pressure becomes positive,
compressing both the alveoli and the airways.
As gas flows from the alveoli along the airways, its pressure falls progressively,
owing to resistance and the conversion to kinetic energy,
so at some point downstream — the equal pressure point — the pressure inside the
airway falls to equal the pleural pressure compressing it from outside;
beyond that point, towards the mouth, the airway is compressed.
Greater effort raises the pleural pressure but raises the alveolar pressure
equally, so the driving pressure across the compressed segment is unchanged,
and the flow is limited — set by the elastic recoil and the resistance upstream.
So dynamic airway compression occurs in forced expiration when the airway pressure
falls to equal the compressing pleural pressure at the equal pressure point,
beyond which the airway is compressed;
further effort cannot increase flow because it raises alveolar and pleural pressure
equally — making maximal expiratory flow effort-independent,
determined by recoil and upstream resistance,
the basis of the flow-volume relationship.
Describe the flow-volume loop.
The flow-volume loop is a graphical display of the airflow against the lung volume
during a maximal forced expiration and inspiration,
and its shape is highly informative about the mechanics and about disease.
It is plotted with the airflow rate on the vertical axis — expiration usually
upward, inspiration downward — against the lung volume on the horizontal axis.
On a maximal forced expiration from full inspiration,
the flow rises very rapidly to a peak — the peak expiratory flow — early in
expiration, and then, because of dynamic compression,
declines in a characteristic straight or slightly concave line back to zero at the
residual volume; this descending limb is effort-independent.
The inspiratory limb is a more symmetrical curve.
The shape changes characteristically with disease:
in obstructive disease the expiratory limb is scooped out, concave,
with a reduced flow at low volumes; in restrictive disease the loop is narrow,
shifted to lower volumes, but with relatively preserved flows;
and fixed or variable large-airway obstruction flattens the relevant limb.
So the flow-volume loop plots flow against lung volume in a maximal breath,
the expiratory limb peaking early then declining effort-independently to the
residual volume; its shape distinguishing obstructive disease,
with its scooped expiratory limb, from restrictive disease, with its narrow loop,
and revealing large-airway obstruction — a valuable diagnostic display.
Describe the regional distribution of ventilation in the lung.
Ventilation is not distributed uniformly through the lung;
in the upright lung it is greater at the base than at the apex,
and this follows from the effect of gravity on the intrapleural pressure and hence
on the resting size of the alveoli.
Because of the weight of the lung, the intrapleural pressure is less negative —
more positive — at the base than at the apex.
As a result, at the functional residual capacity the alveoli at the apex are held
more expanded, near the flat top of their compliance curve,
while those at the base are less expanded, on the steeper part of the curve.
When a breath is taken, the same change in pressure therefore produces a greater
change in volume in the basal alveoli, on the steep compliant part,
than in the apical alveoli on the flat part — so the base ventilates more than the
apex.
At very low lung volumes, however, the dependent airways may close,
reversing the pattern.
So ventilation is greater at the base than the apex of the upright lung,
because gravity makes the intrapleural pressure less negative at the base,
so basal alveoli sit on the steeper,
more compliant part of the pressure-volume curve and expand more for a given
pressure change — a gravitational distribution important to the matching of
ventilation and perfusion.
Describe the concept of time constants in the lung.
The time constant is a concept describing how quickly a region of lung fills and
empties, important because the lung is not uniform and different regions have
different time constants, affecting the distribution of ventilation,
especially when breathing is rapid.
The time constant of a lung unit is the product of its compliance and its
resistance, and it represents the time taken for the unit to fill or empty to a
given fraction of its final volume;
a unit with a long time constant fills and empties slowly.
Because compliance and resistance vary across the lung and in disease,
different units have different time constants:
a unit with a high resistance or a high compliance has a long time constant and is
slow — a slow alveolus; one with low resistance and low compliance is fast.
At slow respiratory rates there is time for all units to fill and empty,
but as the rate increases, the slow units cannot keep pace and receive less
ventilation, so ventilation is redistributed and may become maldistributed —
frequency-dependent.
So the time constant, the product of compliance and resistance,
determines how fast a lung unit fills and empties;
regional differences create fast and slow units,
and at high respiratory rates the slow units are underventilated — causing
frequency-dependent maldistribution of ventilation,
relevant to disease and to mechanical ventilation.
Describe dead space and how it is measured.
Dead space is the part of each breath that does not take part in gas exchange —
ventilation that is, in effect, wasted — and it is of two kinds whose sum is the
physiological dead space.
The anatomical dead space is the volume of the conducting airways,
from the mouth to the terminal bronchioles,
which conduct gas but have no alveoli for exchange — about a hundred and fifty
millilitres, or roughly a third of a tidal breath.
The alveolar dead space is the volume of any alveoli that are ventilated but not
perfused, so that their ventilation is wasted;
it is small in health but increases in disease, as with pulmonary embolism.
The physiological dead space is the sum of the two.
The anatomical dead space is measured by Fowler's method,
analysing the washout of nitrogen or the carbon dioxide in a single expirate.
The physiological dead space is measured by the Bohr method,
which compares the carbon dioxide in the alveolar gas and the mixed expired gas:
the dead-space fraction of the tidal volume equals the difference between the
alveolar and the mixed-expired carbon dioxide,
divided by the alveolar carbon dioxide.
So dead space is wasted ventilation: the anatomical, the conducting airways,
measured by Fowler's method; and the alveolar,
the ventilated-but-unperfused alveoli; their sum the physiological dead space,
measured by the Bohr method from the alveolar and mixed-expired carbon dioxide — a
quantity raised in disease and by anaesthesia.
What is the relevance of airway resistance and dead space to anaesthesia?
Airway resistance and dead space are of direct relevance to anaesthesia,
affecting ventilation and gas exchange and being altered by our interventions.
Increased airway resistance — from bronchospasm,
which anaesthesia and airway instrumentation can provoke, from secretions,
or from the apparatus and tracheal tube,
which add resistance — increases the work of breathing and can impair ventilation,
and its recognition and treatment with bronchodilators and adequate expiratory time
are important, particularly in patients with obstructive disease.
The flow-volume loop and resistance measurements assess this.
Dead space is increased by anaesthesia and by the breathing apparatus,
which adds apparatus dead space, and by alveolar dead space from reduced perfusion,
hypotension or embolism; an increased dead space reduces the efficiency of
ventilation, requiring a greater minute ventilation to maintain carbon dioxide
clearance.
Capnography reflects these.
So airway resistance and dead space are central to anaesthesia: resistance,
raised by bronchospasm, secretions and apparatus,
increases the work and impairs ventilation; and dead space,
increased by apparatus and by reduced perfusion,
lowers ventilatory efficiency — both monitored, notably by capnography,
and managed to maintain effective ventilation.
Pull it together: how do the resistive properties shape the distribution and
efficiency of ventilation?
I would draw it together around the resistive and the regional properties of the
lung as determinants of how, and how efficiently,
ventilation is distributed and achieved.
The resistance to airflow, governed steeply by airway calibre,
sets the resistive work of breathing and, in forced expiration,
limits flow through dynamic compression,
giving the effort-independent expiratory flow seen in the flow-volume loop.
The distribution of ventilation within the lung is shaped by gravity,
which favours the base, and by the regional time constants — the product of
compliance and resistance — which, when they differ,
cause maldistribution at high respiratory rates.
The efficiency of ventilation is reduced by dead space,
the wasted ventilation of the conducting airways and of unperfused alveoli,
so that only part of each breath reaches perfused alveoli.
Anaesthesia disturbs all of these.
So the resistive properties — airway calibre setting resistance and limiting
expiratory flow, regional time constants and gravity distributing ventilation,
and dead space reducing its efficiency — together shape the distribution and
effectiveness of ventilation; their understanding underlying the management of
obstruction, maldistribution and wasted ventilation in anaesthesia.
Distinguish laminar from turbulent flow,
and describe the role of the Reynolds number.
Gas flow through the airways may be laminar or turbulent,
and the distinction matters because the two obey different rules and have different
consequences for resistance.
In laminar flow, the gas moves in smooth, orderly, concentric layers,
fastest in the centre; here the flow is proportional to the driving pressure,
the relationship is governed by the Hagen-Poiseuille equation,
and the resistance depends on the viscosity of the gas.
In turbulent flow, the gas moves chaotically with eddies;
here the flow is proportional not to the pressure but to its square root,
so resistance rises with flow, and the resistance depends on the density of the gas
rather than its viscosity.
Whether flow is laminar or turbulent is predicted by the Reynolds number,
a dimensionless quantity that increases with the velocity,
the density and the diameter, and decreases with the viscosity;
above a critical value, flow becomes turbulent.
Turbulence is therefore favoured at high flow rates,
at branches and irregularities, and in large airways.
So laminar flow is smooth, pressure-proportional and viscosity-dependent,
governed by Hagen-Poiseuille, while turbulent flow is chaotic,
proportional to the square root of pressure and density-dependent;
the Reynolds number predicts the transition, turbulence favoured by high velocity,
density and diameter — a distinction relevant to the work of breathing and to the
use of low-density gas mixtures.
Why and when is a helium-oxygen mixture used?
A helium-oxygen mixture, known as heliox,
is used to reduce the resistance to breathing in certain conditions of upper or
large airway obstruction, and its rationale follows directly from the physics of
turbulent flow.
Helium is much less dense than nitrogen,
so a helium-oxygen mixture has a far lower density than air,
though a similar viscosity.
Where flow is turbulent — as in the large airways and at sites of obstruction,
where the Reynolds number is high — the resistance depends on the density of the
gas; so breathing the low-density helium mixture reduces the resistance and the
work of breathing, and may convert turbulent flow back to laminar by lowering the
Reynolds number.
This makes it useful as a temporising measure in conditions with significant
large-airway obstruction, such as upper airway obstruction, croup or stridor.
Its limitation is that the benefit requires turbulent flow in large airways,
so it is less useful in small-airway disease where flow is laminar,
and the helium reduces the maximum inspired oxygen concentration.
So heliox, a low-density helium-oxygen mixture,
reduces resistance and the work of breathing where flow is turbulent — in
large-airway and upper-airway obstruction — because turbulent resistance depends on
density and the lower density also reduces turbulence;
a temporising measure limited to large-airway obstruction and by its effect on
inspired oxygen.
Describe the autonomic and other control of bronchial smooth muscle.
The calibre of the airways, and so the airway resistance,
is regulated by the bronchial smooth muscle,
which is under several controlling influences,
important to the understanding of bronchoconstriction and its treatment.
The parasympathetic nervous system,
via the vagus and acting through muscarinic receptors,
is the main bronchoconstrictor and provides a resting bronchomotor tone;
reflex bronchoconstriction can be provoked by irritation of the airway,
as by a tracheal tube or secretions.
The sympathetic influence is largely humoral:
circulating adrenaline acts on beta-two adrenoceptors on the bronchial muscle to
cause bronchodilatation — the basis of the beta-two agonist bronchodilators.
There is, in addition, a non-adrenergic, non-cholinergic system,
with inhibitory components mediating bronchodilatation,
through mediators such as nitric oxide and vasoactive intestinal peptide,
and excitatory components.
Numerous local mediators, released in inflammation and allergy — histamine,
leukotrienes and others — cause bronchoconstriction.
So bronchial smooth muscle is controlled by parasympathetic,
muscarinic bronchoconstriction providing resting tone and reflex constriction;
by beta-two-mediated bronchodilatation from circulating adrenaline and beta-agonist
drugs; by a non-adrenergic, non-cholinergic system;
and by inflammatory mediators causing constriction — a control underlying airway
tone, bronchospasm, and the action of bronchodilators,
central to managing the patient with reactive airways.
Describe the spirometric distinction between obstructive and restrictive disease.
Spirometry, the measurement of forced expiratory volumes and flows,
is used to characterise lung disease into obstructive and restrictive patterns,
a fundamental clinical distinction based on the relationship between the volume
expired and the time taken.
The two key measurements are the forced vital capacity — the total volume forcibly
exhaled from full inspiration — and the forced expiratory volume in one second —
the volume exhaled in the first second — and their ratio.
In an obstructive pattern, as in asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,
the airways are narrowed and expiration is slowed,
so the forced expiratory volume in one second is reduced more than the forced vital
capacity, and the ratio of the two is reduced,
characteristically below the normal value; the flow is limited.
In a restrictive pattern, as in fibrosis or chest-wall disease,
the lung volumes are reduced but the airways are normal,
so both the forced expiratory volume in one second and the forced vital capacity
are reduced in proportion, and the ratio is preserved or even increased.
So spirometry distinguishes the obstructive pattern — a reduced forced expiratory
volume in one second and a reduced ratio,
from airway narrowing — from the restrictive pattern — reduced volumes with a
preserved ratio, from reduced lung expansion;
a basic characterisation of lung disease relevant to preoperative assessment.
Describe the cough reflex.
The cough reflex is a protective respiratory reflex that forcibly expels air,
and with it irritant material or secretions, from the airways,
important both for airway defence and because it is provoked and modified by
anaesthesia.
It is initiated by the stimulation of irritant receptors in the airway mucosa,
particularly in the larynx, trachea and large bronchi,
by mechanical or chemical irritation;
the afferent impulses travel chiefly in the vagus to a cough centre in the medulla.
The efferent response is a coordinated sequence: a deep inspiration,
followed by closure of the glottis and contraction of the expiratory muscles
against the closed glottis, building up a high intrathoracic pressure,
and then the sudden opening of the glottis, releasing a rapid,
high-velocity expiratory blast that, with the dynamic compression of the airways,
sweeps material towards the mouth.
The reflex is depressed by anaesthesia and by opioids, impairing airway protection,
while airway instrumentation under light anaesthesia may provoke vigorous coughing
or laryngospasm.
So the cough reflex, triggered by airway irritant receptors via the vagus,
produces a deep inspiration, glottic closure with build-up of pressure,
and an explosive expiration clearing the airway; it is a key airway defence,
depressed by anaesthesia and opioids yet provoked by instrumentation — of direct
relevance to airway management.
Describe the single-breath nitrogen washout test and what it reveals.
The single-breath nitrogen washout test is a technique that demonstrates the uneven
distribution of ventilation and identifies the onset of airway closure,
illustrating several of the principles we have discussed.
In the test, the subject takes a single breath of pure oxygen from the residual
volume to total lung capacity, and then exhales slowly to residual volume while the
nitrogen concentration at the mouth is continuously measured.
Because the oxygen breath dilutes the resident nitrogen unevenly — the apex,
less well ventilated, receiving proportionally more of the oxygen because its
alveoli were larger to begin with — the expired nitrogen concentration changes
through the breath in four phases.
The trace shows: phase one, pure dead-space gas with no nitrogen; phase two,
a rising mixture of dead-space and alveolar gas; phase three, the alveolar plateau,
which slopes gently upward owing to uneven emptying; and phase four,
a terminal sharp rise in nitrogen, marking the point at which the dependent airways
close and emptying comes only from the nitrogen-rich apex — the onset of airway
closure, from which the closing volume is derived.
So the single-breath nitrogen washout, exhaling after a breath of oxygen,
reveals the uneven distribution of ventilation in the sloping alveolar plateau,
and the onset of airway closure in the terminal phase-four rise — measuring the
closing volume and demonstrating regional ventilation,
dead space and airway closure in one elegant test.
Summarise how airway resistance and its disturbances are managed in anaesthesia.
I would summarise it around the recognition that airway resistance,
governed steeply by airway calibre,
is frequently increased in the perioperative period,
and that its management rests on understanding the determinants of calibre.
The anaesthetist adds resistance through the apparatus — the tracheal tube and
breathing system — and so chooses an adequately sized tube and allows sufficient
expiratory time.
Bronchoconstriction may be provoked by airway instrumentation,
especially under light anaesthesia,
or reflect the patient's reactive airways disease;
it is minimised by adequate depth of anaesthesia and treated with the beta-two
agonist bronchodilators, anticholinergics,
and agents with bronchodilator properties,
and by treating the underlying inflammation.
The maintenance of lung volume, since resistance rises steeply at low lung volumes,
helps keep the airways open. In severe obstruction,
attention to expiratory time avoids gas trapping and dynamic hyperinflation.
So airway resistance in anaesthesia is managed by minimising apparatus resistance,
preventing and treating bronchospasm with adequate anaesthetic depth and
bronchodilators, maintaining lung volume to keep airways open,
and allowing adequate expiratory time to avoid gas trapping — the practical
application of the physiology of airway calibre and resistance to safe ventilation.
Describe the pathophysiology of asthma.
Asthma is a chronic inflammatory disease of the airways characterised by variable
and reversible airflow obstruction,
and its pathophysiology is one of airway narrowing from several reversible
mechanisms superimposed on inflammation, increasing airway resistance.
The underlying abnormality is a chronic inflammation of the airways,
with an infiltrate of inflammatory cells and a hyper-responsiveness of the airways
to stimuli.
On exposure to a trigger — an allergen, infection, cold air,
exercise or irritants — the airways narrow through three mechanisms:
contraction of the bronchial smooth muscle, bronchoconstriction,
the most rapidly reversible; oedema and inflammation of the airway wall;
and the secretion of mucus, which can plug the airways.
This narrowing increases the airway resistance, and,
because resistance depends so steeply on radius,
even modest narrowing greatly raises it; the obstruction is worse in expiration,
causing gas trapping and hyperinflation,
and produces the scooped expiratory limb of the flow-volume loop and the reduced
forced expiratory volume.
The obstruction is characteristically variable and reversible,
responding to bronchodilators and to anti-inflammatory treatment.
So asthma is a chronic inflammatory disease with airway hyper-responsiveness,
in which triggers cause reversible airway narrowing through smooth muscle
contraction, wall oedema and mucus, raising airway resistance,
trapping gas and limiting expiratory flow;
the obstruction being variable and reversible — a condition whose bronchospasm may
be provoked by anaesthesia and airway instrumentation.
Describe the pathophysiology of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease is a common,
progressive disease characterised by persistent,
largely irreversible airflow obstruction, usually caused by smoking,
and it comprises two overlapping processes — emphysema and chronic bronchitis —
whose pathophysiology raises airway resistance and impairs gas exchange.
Emphysema is the destruction of the alveolar walls and the lung's elastic tissue,
which has two consequences: the loss of elastic recoil reduces the driving pressure
for expiration and removes the radial traction that holds the small airways open,
so they collapse on expiration, causing airflow limitation and gas trapping;
and the destruction of alveolar surface reduces the area for gas exchange.
Chronic bronchitis is the inflammation,
mucus hypersecretion and narrowing of the airways, increasing their resistance.
Together these cause a fixed airflow obstruction,
hyperinflation and gas trapping with a raised residual volume,
an increased work of breathing, and ventilation-perfusion mismatch impairing gas
exchange, leading in time to hypoxaemia, hypercapnia and pulmonary hypertension.
So chronic obstructive pulmonary disease combines emphysema — destruction of
alveolar walls and elastic tissue, causing loss of recoil, airway collapse,
gas trapping and loss of exchange surface — with chronic bronchitis — airway
inflammation, mucus and narrowing; producing fixed obstruction, hyperinflation,
increased work and mismatch, and ultimately hypoxaemia,
hypercapnia and pulmonary hypertension — a major challenge in anaesthesia.
Describe the resistance added by anaesthetic apparatus and the tracheal tube.
The anaesthetic apparatus and especially the tracheal tube add resistance to
breathing, in series with the patient's own airway resistance,
and this added resistance is important because it increases the work of breathing
and can be substantial, particularly with small tubes.
The tracheal tube is the chief contributor: being a narrow tube,
its resistance is governed by the physics of flow, so that,
by the Hagen-Poiseuille relationship for laminar flow,
the resistance is inversely proportional to the fourth power of the radius and
proportional to the length.
Consequently, a small reduction in the internal diameter of the tube greatly
increases its resistance — a narrow paediatric tube offering a high resistance —
and a long tube more than a short one.
At the high flows of vigorous breathing,
the flow through the tube and its connectors becomes turbulent,
when resistance rises even more steeply and depends on gas density.
The breathing circuit, valves and filters add further resistance.
This added resistance increases the work of breathing,
which matters in the spontaneously breathing patient and during weaning,
and is reduced by choosing the largest appropriate tube and minimising its length
and connectors.
So the anaesthetic apparatus, chiefly the tracheal tube,
adds resistance in series with the patient's airways;
by Hagen-Poiseuille the tube's resistance rises steeply as its radius falls and
with its length, and becomes turbulent and density-dependent at high flows —
increasing the work of breathing, minimised by using the largest suitable tube and
the shortest circuit.
Describe the measurement of airway resistance.
Airway resistance, being the pressure difference driving flow divided by the flow,
requires for its measurement the simultaneous knowledge of the flow and of the
pressure difference between the mouth and the alveoli,
and several techniques achieve this.
The flow is readily measured at the mouth by a pneumotachograph.
The difficulty is the alveolar pressure, which cannot be measured directly,
and the methods differ in how they obtain it.
Body plethysmography is the classic method:
the seated subject breathes inside a sealed box,
and from the changes in box pressure as the chest compresses the gas,
the alveolar pressure is derived, allowing resistance to be calculated.
The interrupter technique briefly occludes the airway during breathing,
assuming that during the momentary occlusion the mouth pressure equilibrates with
the alveolar pressure, which is then read.
The forced oscillation technique applies small pressure oscillations at the mouth
and analyses the resulting flow to derive the respiratory impedance.
In ventilated patients, resistance can be estimated from the difference between the
peak and plateau airway pressures divided by the flow.
So airway resistance is measured from simultaneous flow and the mouth-to-alveolar
pressure difference: by body plethysmography deriving alveolar pressure from box
pressure, by the interrupter technique, by forced oscillation,
or in ventilated patients from the peak-minus-plateau pressure — techniques
quantifying the resistance central to obstructive disease.
Describe the capnography waveform and the information it provides.
Capnography, the continuous measurement and display of the carbon dioxide in the
respired gas, produces a characteristic waveform over each breath that is one of
the most informative monitors in anaesthesia, reflecting ventilation,
perfusion and the airway.
The normal time capnogram, plotting carbon dioxide against time,
has a recognisable shape in phases: phase one, the baseline at zero,
is the start of expiration, exhaling carbon-dioxide-free gas from the anatomical
dead space; phase two is a rapid upstroke as alveolar gas,
mixed with dead-space gas, begins to appear; phase three is the alveolar plateau,
a near-flat or gently rising segment representing alveolar gas,
whose end — the end-tidal point — gives the end-tidal carbon dioxide,
approximating the alveolar and so the arterial value;
then a rapid downstroke to zero as inspiration brings in fresh gas.
The waveform gives a great deal: it confirms that the tube is in the trachea and
ventilation is occurring, monitors the adequacy of ventilation through the
end-tidal value, and its shape reveals abnormalities — a sloping plateau in
obstruction, for instance.
So the capnogram shows, over each breath, a baseline of dead-space gas,
an upstroke, an alveolar plateau ending at the end-tidal carbon dioxide,
and a downstroke on inspiration; it confirms tracheal placement and ventilation,
monitors its adequacy, and reveals airway and other abnormalities by its shape — an
indispensable monitor applying the physiology of dead space and ventilation.
Describe collateral ventilation and the phenomenon of pendelluft.
Collateral ventilation and pendelluft are two phenomena concerning the movement of
gas between regions of the lung by routes other than the normal sequential filling,
both relevant to the distribution of ventilation and to disease.
Collateral ventilation is the ventilation of alveoli through pathways that bypass
their own airways — the pores of Kohn between adjacent alveoli,
the channels of Lambert between bronchioles and alveoli,
and interbronchiolar channels — so that a region whose airway is obstructed may
still receive gas from its neighbours, limiting its collapse;
this collateral ventilation is more developed in some species and increases in
emphysema.
Pendelluft, a term meaning pendulum air,
refers to the to-and-fro movement of gas between regions of lung that have
different time constants: if one region fills and empties faster than another,
gas may move out of the fast region and into the slow region, and back,
during the breath, rather than all gas moving in and out through the mouth — a
redistribution within the lung that wastes ventilation and is exaggerated when time
constants differ widely, as in disease, and in conditions such as a flail chest.
So collateral ventilation allows alveoli to be ventilated through the pores of Kohn
and other channels, bypassing obstructed airways and limiting collapse;
while pendelluft is the to-and-fro movement of gas between regions of different
time constants within the lung — phenomena affecting the distribution and
efficiency of ventilation, particularly in disease.
Describe the peak expiratory flow rate and its clinical use.
The peak expiratory flow rate is the maximum flow achieved during a forced
expiration from full inspiration, and it is a simple,
effort-dependent measure of airflow obstruction that is widely used,
particularly in asthma, because it can be measured cheaply and repeatedly with a
hand-held meter.
It is reached very early in a forced expiration, near total lung capacity,
before dynamic airway compression limits the flow, and so,
unlike the later effort-independent part of expiration,
it depends on the effort and the muscle strength as well as on the airway calibre.
Its value is reduced by airflow obstruction,
as in asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and it correlates,
though imperfectly, with the forced expiratory volume in one second.
Its great practical use is in the monitoring of asthma:
because it is so easily measured, patients can record it serially at home to detect
worsening obstruction, to assess the response to treatment,
and to recognise a severe attack, the characteristic variability of asthma being
shown by fluctuations in the reading.
Its limitations are its dependence on effort and its insensitivity to early
small-airway disease.
So the peak expiratory flow rate is the maximum forced expiratory flow,
reached early in expiration and dependent on effort and airway calibre;
reduced in obstruction and widely used, for its simplicity,
in the serial home monitoring of asthma to detect worsening and assess treatment —
a practical, if effort-dependent, measure of airflow.
Describe the factors that determine the anatomical and physiological dead space.
The dead space, the wasted ventilation,
is influenced by a number of physiological and practical factors that the
anaesthetist should know, since they alter the efficiency of ventilation.
The anatomical dead space, the volume of the conducting airways,
is increased by anything enlarging those airways:
it increases with the size of the person,
with large lung inflations — since the airways are distended and lengthened at high
lung volumes — with extension of the neck and protrusion of the jaw,
which lengthen the upper airway, and is reduced by neck flexion and by a
tracheostomy or tracheal tube, which bypasses the upper airway.
The alveolar dead space, the ventilated but unperfused alveoli,
is small in health but increased by anything reducing pulmonary perfusion to
ventilated regions — a low cardiac output or hypotension, pulmonary embolism,
and the high alveolar pressures of positive-pressure ventilation creating zone-one
conditions.
The physiological dead space, their sum, is thus increased by these factors,
and additionally the apparatus dead space of the breathing equipment adds to the
total wasted ventilation.
So the anatomical dead space is increased by body size,
large lung volumes and neck extension and reduced by neck flexion and tracheal
intubation, while the alveolar dead space is increased by reduced perfusion —
hypotension, embolism, positive-pressure ventilation; their sum,
the physiological dead space, with the apparatus dead space,
determining the wasted ventilation, which anaesthesia tends to increase.
Describe the mechanisms of action of the bronchodilator drugs.
The bronchodilator drugs relax the bronchial smooth muscle to widen the airways and
reduce resistance, and they act through the physiological pathways controlling
bronchial tone, falling into a few main classes.
The beta-two adrenoceptor agonists, such as salbutamol, are the mainstay:
by stimulating the beta-two receptors on the bronchial smooth muscle,
they raise cyclic adenosine monophosphate within the muscle,
causing relaxation and bronchodilatation;
they act quickly and are used for acute relief,
with longer-acting agents for maintenance.
The antimuscarinic, or anticholinergic, drugs, such as ipratropium,
block the muscarinic receptors through which the parasympathetic vagal tone causes
bronchoconstriction, so removing that resting bronchoconstrictor tone and dilating
the airways.
The methylxanthines, such as aminophylline,
cause bronchodilatation by mechanisms including the inhibition of
phosphodiesterase, which raises cyclic adenosine monophosphate,
though their use is limited by toxicity.
In addition, although not bronchodilators in the acute sense,
the corticosteroids reduce the underlying airway inflammation and oedema.
So the bronchodilators act through the pathways of bronchial control:
beta-two agonists raising cyclic adenosine monophosphate to relax the muscle,
antimuscarinics blocking vagal bronchoconstrictor tone,
and methylxanthines raising cyclic adenosine monophosphate by phosphodiesterase
inhibition, with corticosteroids treating the inflammation — a pharmacology
following directly from the physiology of airway tone,
central to managing bronchospasm.
Thank you. An excellent account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Airway resistance = (mouth-to-alveolar pressure difference) ÷ flow;
for laminar flow (Hagen-Poiseuille) it depends steeply on radius (inversely as the
4th power), so calibre dominates; the main site is the medium bronchi,
not the very numerous small airways (whose huge total cross-section gives low
combined resistance).
Second, Airway calibre/resistance is altered by lung volume (resistance falls as
the lung expands via radial traction, rising steeply at low volume),
by bronchial tone (parasympathetic/mediators constrict,
sympathetic β2 and beta-agonists dilate),
and by secretions/oedema/inflammation — underlying obstructive disease and its
treatment.
Third, In forced expiration, dynamic airway compression at the equal-pressure point
makes maximal expiratory flow effort-independent (further effort raises alveolar
and pleural pressure equally); the flow-volume loop shows this — a scooped
expiratory limb in obstruction, a narrow loop in restriction,
and flattening with large-airway obstruction.
Fourth, Ventilation is greater at the base than apex of the upright lung (gravity
makes intrapleural pressure less negative basally,
placing basal alveoli on the steeper, more compliant part of the curve);
regional time constants (compliance × resistance) create fast and slow units,
so slow units are underventilated at high rates (frequency-dependent
maldistribution).
Fifth, Dead space is wasted ventilation: anatomical (conducting airways, ~150 mL,
by Fowler's method) plus alveolar (ventilated-but-unperfused alveoli) =
physiological dead space (Bohr method:
Vd/Vt = (alveolar − mixed-expired CO2) ÷ alveolar CO2); resistance (bronchospasm,
secretions, apparatus) and dead space (apparatus,
reduced perfusion) are increased by anaesthesia and monitored by capnography.
Thank you. That concludes the station.